Good afternoon.
My name is Garth Cummings.
I'm with Apple's
Developer Tech Support Group.
I'd like to welcome you to session 508,
Customizing Mac OS X with Open Source.
And here to kick off the festivities is
open source engineer Kevin Van Vechten.
So today I'm going to be talking
about how to customize Mac OS X using
the open source software that
Apple provides on its website.
And this source is part of Darwin,
which I'll describe a
little bit in a minute.
And the emphasis of this talk is really
going to be how to make these sources
useful to you to solve problems that
you might be interested in solving.
So, as an overview,
we're going to talk about
what open source is,
in case any of you aren't familiar
with the concept of open source,
and we'll move quickly to talking
a little bit about what Darwin is,
and Darwin is Apple's
open source project.
Then we'll go over briefly how
to add some common open source
projects to your Mac OS X system,
but the heart of the talk will be
how to customize Mac OS X using the
open source that Apple provides.
And the second half of the
session will be hands-on,
which means if you've downloaded
the sample code for the session
and have it on your PowerBooks,
you can follow along.
And what I'll be doing is using
some tools that Apple provides
in order to build the sources
and install them on your systems.
So first, what is open source?
Well, open source is a very loose term,
but basically what it means is
there are programs whose source
code is available on the internet
that is free for you to download,
inspect, modify, and deploy.
And then in the spirit of open source is
to take your modifications and contribute
them back to whatever group published
the sources in the first place so that
they can benefit from the enhancements
and so can all the other users.
And by working collaboratively
in this fashion,
the products really start to take flight.
Much of Mac OS X is open source,
specifically everything
at the Unix layer.
And more information about open source in
general can be found at the OpenSource.
OpenSource Initiative's website,
and that's this URL that you see here,
www.opensource.org.
Now,
Darwin is Apple's open source initiative.
It is the open source
portion of Mac OS X.
It includes the kernel,
the I/O Kit drivers and families,
and the BSD commands and libraries.
You can see on this diagram that
Darwin provides the base of Mac OS X,
upon which Carbon and Cocoa and Aqua sit,
but those technologies
are proprietary to Apple.
It's only the Darwin technology
that's open source.
So, how does open source help you?
Well, one of the biggest examples of it
helping you developers is as reference.
If you're curious how the file system
is implemented or how certain libraries
on the system are implemented,
you can actually download a lot of
these sources and read through them.
And, you know,
as I'm sure you're all familiar,
documentation sometimes doesn't
give you the whole picture.
And in certain cases,
documentation is best done by
reading the source and seeing
what's actually going on.
It also helps with debugging.
It's possible to take a lot of these
sources and build a fully symboled
version of a library so that when you're
doing your step-by-step debugging in GDB,
you can actually step into the functions
that you're calling and inspect what
the variables are inside the library.
Um...
It's also useful for customization,
which is going to be the
emphasis of this talk.
If there's a particular default
flag that's very annoying
in your enterprise setup,
or if there's a security fix that you
need immediately and Apple doesn't
have a software update for it yet,
perhaps you could download
the sources from Apple's site,
apply that patch yourself, reinstall,
and be ready to go.
Also, it's useful for research.
There's a lot of work going on.
For example, trusted BSD work is being
ported over to Darwin.
It includes things like
mandatory access controls.
And there are other high-performance
computing research applications that can
use the open source that Apple provides.
So for our hands-on portion of this talk,
what we'll be doing as an example
is adding Bonjour support to
the BSD Unix talk utility.
So basically we'll be making
an iChat of the 1970s.
And to do this,
we'll use the Darwin build scripts,
which basically set up a lot of
the environment that's necessary
for building a Darwin project.
For the remainder of the talk,
I'm going to be talking about
what that environment is,
why it's so important,
and then when we actually
do the hands-on portion,
we'll use the scripts that take care
of all the nitty-gritty details for us.
So adding new software
to Mac OS X in general.
There's kind of a basic
open source lifecycle,
which is pretty common to almost
any project that you're going to
download and install on Mac OS X.
So you can see here that
there are five overall steps,
the first of which is pretty obvious.
You need to download the source.
So in this example,
it's using the cURL command line utility
to download the source code to Lua.
Lua is a very lightweight
scripting language,
which many of you probably
have never heard of.
It happens to be the scripting
language used by World of Warcraft,
so you might wanna check that out.
But we can download it.
And the next step is to extract it.
Usually it's a archive,
a single tar.gz or tar.bz format.
And once you've extracted it,
you have a whole tree of all
the sources on your system.
The next step is actually
a pretty magical step,
and that's to configure the sources.
And what you usually do is
just change into the directory
and run the configure script,
and it goes and figures out a lot
of the properties of your system,
which libraries you have installed,
which header files are available,
whether it's a big endian
or little endian system.
As you know,
there's Darwin on both PowerPC and Intel,
so we'll be talking a
little bit about that.
And once everything's configured,
you can go ahead and compile.
Usually there's a top level make
file where you would do make all,
and it would go through and compile
all of the portions of the project.
And once that's done,
you could say make install,
and it would install it on your system.
Well,
there are a few things in this basic
lifecycle that you actually probably
want to do a little bit differently
when installing on Mac OS X,
so I'm going to talk
about that in detail now.
Sometimes in order to get things
to work properly on Mac OS X,
you need to patch the software.
So Linux's driver model, for example,
is quite a bit different than I/O Kit.
That's some major areas of the
software needing to be changed.
One of the systems that actually has a
large collection of patches and makes
it easy to grab software is Fink.
Fink is hosted at SourceForge.
It's based on the Debian packages system,
which is used in Debian Linux.
And they have over 5,000 programs
which are ready to go on Mac OS X.
And one of the major advantages of
Fink is it offers pre-built software.
So you can download a package
that's already been built,
install the binary,
and run all of your common
open source programs.
Another popular system is Darwin Ports,
which is hosted at opendarwin.org.
Darwin Ports is similar in
nature to FreeBSD Ports.
It's a completely
different implementation,
but the spirit is largely the same.
They have over 2,500 programs,
which you can install.
Unlike Fink,
Darwin Ports really emphasizes
building these sources from scratch,
which is useful sometimes if
you're looking to customize them.
But one of the things that both of
these products do is make these open
source projects work well with Mac OS X.
And one of the keys to working well
with Mac OS X is to avoid installing
things into the system directories.
And the main reason for this
is Apple uses Software Update.
And Software Update doesn't care
what you've installed on your system.
It wants to install what
it wants to install.
And it'll happily overwrite any
files which you've modified.
So staying out of the slash system
directory and out of the slash
user directory is a good way to
stay out of Software Update's way.
Traditionally,
user local has been available
to you to install into.
That's perfectly fine.
Apple will never install
into there on one of its
CD updates or software updates.
But if you're building the
Darwin sources themselves,
if you're building actual
components of the Mac OS X system,
there are intermediate files
that get placed into user local.
So it's really best to stay
out of user local as well.
If you want to be completely
out of Apple's way.
And for this reason,
Darwin Ports has chosen opt local.
And Fink has chosen SW as
directories that are completely
independent of the base system.
And that's where they install
all of their libraries
and all of their programs.
So if you're wondering how you can
move software to something other
than slash user or slash user local,
usually this is done in the
configure phase of the open
source software lifecycle.
And quite often a configure script
will have a dash dash prefix argument,
where in this example we're setting
the prefix to slash my stuff.
And instead of going into user local bin,
this project would probably
install into slash my stuff bin.
Another good practice is to actually
install into an intermediate location
before copying it onto the base system.
Because when you just do a make
install without any other arguments,
it'll just install onto your system
and you have no idea which libraries
and which binaries were installed.
However, if you a lot of times
specify a destr argument,
in this case we're setting
it to temp new project,
what we can do here is install
into this intermediate location,
look in the intermediate location to
see what will end up being installed,
see if there's any conflicts
that we're worried about,
and once everything's okay
and we're sure of that,
we can then copy that
into the base system.
And it also gives us a chance to keep a
record of how we've modified our system.
So I think this is a very
important thing to keep in mind,
is to inspect the results of anything
you build before installing it on
your system so you have a good idea.
of exactly how your
system's being modified.
But as I said earlier,
the bulk of this talk is about
customizing the things that are
in Mac OS X themselves using
the open source Apple provides.
And there is some risk doing this, right?
If you modify the kernel, for example,
there's a chance that the
system won't boot if there's
a bug in your modification.
So that's a fairly high risk change.
You can make lesser risky changes by
changing libraries and frameworks,
although the exposure of any change to
a library framework is fairly large.
Any incompatibility introduced
there will affect a wide variety of
applications or command line tools.
Plugins are a little bit less
risky because it will only
affect the application that
happens to use that plugin,
not a wide variety on the system.
And then individual command line
tools are generally pretty safe
to update because they're at
the edge of the dependency tree.
They're only used by themselves,
and it's fairly isolated from
impacting the rest of the system,
though there are exceptions to that.
If Perl doesn't work on your system,
you might find a lot of the various
scripts in an unhappy state,
so it's best to be judicious
about what tools you're modifying.
And always make backups because if
something doesn't go how you planned,
you're going to want to restore from
a backup of that tool in order to get
your system back into a working state.
So, as I mentioned earlier,
software update may overwrite
things that you've modified,
and there are a few best practices
we can do to mitigate this risk.
Libraries and frameworks
may be incompatible,
right?
So your modifications
could work fine today,
but when software update comes
out and updates a new application
that has a different expectation
of how that framework should work,
that might be when you
notice the incompatibility.
So it's a good idea to keep your
backup copies of the modified
sources around for a long time,
because it might work today,
but that doesn't mean
it'll work tomorrow.
And you'll want to restore from backup
to see if that was indeed the problem.
One of the practices that I do
personally is to download the
software update packages from Apple's
website at www.apple.com/support and
install them manually and not rely
on software update to install them.
And the reason for this is you
can inspect which files the
software update's going to install
when you're installing manually.
So, using the installer application,
you can choose the show files
item from the file menu once
you're installing the package.
And you can see here that we
have a long list of files,
and the list of files in this instance
is all the files in the user directory
of the Mac OS X 10.4.1 update.
In our example,
you'll recall we're modifying
the Unix talk command,
and the talk command
lives in user bin talk.
As you can see,
it's not present in this list,
so this update's probably going
to coexist peacefully with our
modification that we're going to do.
There's also a command line
method for listing all the files
in a software update package,
and that's that command at
the bottom of the slide,
the ls bomb, and then the path to the
archive.bomb file inside the package.
Bomb stands for bill of materials.
It's a list of all the files
that are included in the package,
and it also includes information
about what their default
permissions should be and ownership.
So to minimize the risk of
your modifications interfering
with software update,
you should also download
the sources from Apple,
because those are the actual
sources that went into Mac OS X.
If you were to grab a
version of Perl from,
say, SourceForge or some other site,
there's really no guarantee
that those sources are anything
like what went into Mac OS X.
There could have been a lot
of modifications that were
done by some third party.
But if you start from Apple's site,
which is at this www.opensource.apple.com
slash DarwinSource,
or there's a mirror of
it at opendarwin.org,
which is a community-run site that
does a lot of Darwin development,
and that's at
darwinsource.opendarwin.org.
These sources are the actual
sources that go into Mac OS X,
so they're a good starting
point for your modifications.
And then once you have those sources,
you should really change
as little as possible.
You should add the specific
feature that you're interested in,
or the specific bug,
and then you can fix and reinstall,
because the smaller the changes you make,
the more likely it will be
compatible for a long time
with Apple's software updates.
When building the software,
there's a lot of different details
which you need to keep in mind,
some of which are
completely unique to Apple.
You've never seen anything like it
in any other open source project,
except for talks like this and
some hints on the mailing list.
You'd probably never know
that it needs to be done.
There are some obvious things
that should be checked,
though.
For example,
which system version and kernel
version you're building on.
This will affect the outcome of
the build because the tools that
are available on each system
of Mac OS X are going to vary.
The system calls that are available
from the kernel are going to vary.
And if something like a configure
script is doing auto detection of
what features are on your system,
if you're building on, say,
a Panther system, but you want to install
on a Tiger system,
there's a good chance that it's not going
to work because that configure script is
going to pick up all the wrong features.
It's going to be configuring
itself for a Panther system,
and that's not what you want.
So one of the good things to do is
to stay on the same general system
version as what you want to install on.
The developer tools version
is equally important.
There are also a lot of
environment variables,
which I'll go over, that need to be set,
and they will dramatically
affect the outcome of the build.
And there are also headers and libraries,
which you probably won't be able
to find by default on your system,
and I'll tell you a little
bit about how to get those.
So the system in kernel version can be
inspected by using the SW_version tool.
That'll print out the
product version of Mac OS X,
which in this case is
10.4 or 10.4.1 or 10.3.9.
There's also a build version.
In this case, it's 8A428.
That is the build of Mac OS X that
is on the Tiger DVDs.
This build version is really the
most precise number that you can
find to identify which system
software is running on your system.
And the build number will change
with every software update,
with every major CD release.
And it's really the most exact
number that's available to you.
The uName tool,
in this example I'm using uName-A,
will print version information about
the kernel that you're running.
For Tiger, the kernel is 8.0.0,
and this is a good way to figure out
which kernel is on the system in case
you might have modified the kernel and it
doesn't match the overall system version.
As you know,
Apple has shipped many different
versions of the developer tools.
There's GCC 295.2,
which I believe was the original
GCC version for Mac OS X.
And as time has gone on,
they've introduced GCC 3.1, GCC 3.3,
GCC 3.5,
which is an internal build that was
used for certain parts of Tiger,
specifically anything to do with 64-bit.
You don't need that.
It actually has been rolled into GCC 4.0.
But one of the things to keep
in mind is different parts of
the system happen to be built
with different compiler versions.
So GCC 4.0 won't build much of the
open source that's available for Tiger.
In fact, you need to go back to GCC 3.3
in order to build a lot of the
Tiger sources that are available.
You can look and see which
version of GCC you're using
by default by typing gcc-v.
And in this example,
you see it is using GCC4 by default,
which is consistent with Tiger.
If you want to change which
version is used by default,
there's the GCC Select tool.
And GCC Select will
change the global default.
In this example, we're using sudo to
make this global change,
and we're selecting GCC version 3.3.
And 3.3 is what is needed to build
most of the Tiger open source.
The environment variables are used by
the Makefiles and Xcode projects that
compile most of Apple's open source.
And there are four very fundamental
environment variables that
almost always need to be set.
The first one is source root.
Source root should be set to the path
of the sources which you are compiling.
So if you've downloaded a tar archive
and extracted it onto your disk,
whatever directory that
extracted tar archive created,
the full path to that should be
specified in the source root variable.
This lets the make file access files
relative to the variable to find the
sources that are supposed to be built.
Another directory that needs to
be specified is the object root.
And the object root is a
purely temporary directory.
It should be empty before
you begin your build.
And the object root is where all of
the .o files and other intermediate
files are going to be placed
while this project is being built.
The following two environment variables,
the symroot and the destroot,
are where the actual products of
your build are going to be placed.
Both of them, again,
should be a full path to an
empty directory to start with.
And the symroot is where all of the
fully debugging-enabled versions will go,
and that has all the symbols that
are needed to do source-level
debugging for the project using GDB.
So you can actually do line-by-line
debugging using whatever libraries and
tools are installed into the symroot.
And then the destroot is where
the finished product goes,
and that is basically what you'll
end up installing on your production
system once you have made the change.
There are some other very important
environment variables as well,
such as the Mac OS X deployment target.
This variable interacts with the
availability macros header file.
And basically the purpose of it
is to determine which APIs are
safe to use on the version of
Mac OS X which you're targeting.
So if you're targeting version 10.4,
which we will be today,
then it will give you warnings
if you're using any APIs that
have been deprecated in Tiger.
Perhaps they were perfectly
fine to use in Panther,
but they're no longer fully supported or
won't be supported in future releases.
So you'll get a warning for that.
It also conditionally defines
a lot of symbols so that,
for example,
if you're on a Tiger machine,
but compiling for Panther and
something new is introduced in Tiger,
you can use it to define
a new version of Mac OS X.
And you'll get a warning because you're
using something that won't exist back
on that system that you're targeting.
No matter which version of
Tiger you're installing for,
so whether it's 10.4 or 10.4.1
or any future software update,
this deployment target
should just be set to 10.4.
It really only corresponds
to the major release number.
So for Panther, it should be 10.3.
For Tiger, it should be 10.4.
It doesn't need to be set for
any of the software updates.
It's really just a major number here.
The same goes for the
RC release variable.
This is something that's used by
various make files in open source
projects to see if they should configure
themselves slightly differently,
whether they're building
for Panther or for Tiger.
So you should set them
to Panther or Tiger,
depending on what you're
interested in installing on.
I guess in the future,
we'll be setting that to
Leopard at some point.
The uname release variable, again,
is a major version number.
So for Darwin, that was 7.0,
and that was the kernel
version in Panther.
For Tiger, it will be 8.0,
since that's the major
kernel version in Tiger.
And this is actually a very
important variable to set.
What it does is it affects the
output of that uname-a tool.
And the reason you'd want to do this,
especially if you're cross-compiling from
Panther to Tiger or Tiger to Panther,
is a lot of scripts will create
directories that have the name
Darwin 7 embedded in them,
or Darwin 8 embedded in them.
GCC is an example of a
project that does this.
And so by setting this
environment variable,
you're basically overriding the default
value on the system and telling it
instead it should always return this
8.0 for the duration of the build,
and that way you'll get the
directories created that you expect.
There's also the RC_ARCHES variable.
This is the architectures
which you are compiling for.
As you probably know,
Darwin has been available
on x86 for some time.
Now Mac OS X will be using the
Intel architecture as well.
You're going to want to specify both
PowerPC and i386 in this variable.
And by virtue of doing this,
the open source projects will
build universal binaries and
universal libraries that will run
on either of these architectures.
And the last of these really
important environment variables
is the RC project name.
And this is the name of the
project that you're building.
So, for example,
if you're downloading GCC sources,
then you should set this variable to GCC.
Or if you're downloading CCTools sources,
you should set the environment
variable to CCTools.
For some projects,
they will produce a completely
different output depending on what
this environment variable is set to.
And that's known as a build alias.
So build aliases are really
where there's one tar archive,
it's the same sources,
but there are completely
different build results.
And that, again,
is based on the value of this
RC project name environment variable.
Here are some of the more
popular examples of this.
There's the Directory Services Password
Server plugin.
That's a source code project
that you can download.
But it has an alternate identity.
It has the DS Password Server framework.
Now, the same tar.gz archive will
produce... So both of these things.
If the environment variable is
set to Password Server plugin,
then it's going to create a plugin.
If it's set to the framework,
it'll create a framework.
And both of them operate together.
And the reason they're in the same
set of sources is really because
there's an interdependency there.
The revision lock, right?
They have a private protocol that
the plugins talk to the framework.
So the same set of sources
produce both of the results.
But if you failed to set this environment
variable... There'd really be no
way for you to build the framework.
I mean, it's absolutely essential.
Another example is cctools and
cctools-o-files or libc and libc-debug.
Setting the environment variable
to libc-debug is the only way
that you can get the debug
version of libc to be built.
If you were to just build
the libc sources without this
environment variable set,
it wouldn't build the
debug version at all.
Thank you.
So this includes a lot of the
variables I was talking about,
as well as some others that
are a little more archaic,
and the list goes on and on.
And really, it's too tedious to
specify them all yourself,
and what I really recommend is
using the Darwin build scripts,
which I'll describe in a few minutes,
to take care of all of
this hard work for you.
It'll also keep things up to date.
We'll be modifying which variables
are set by these scripts as time goes
on to make sure they're in sync with
what these projects are expecting.
And the last point I had about
building is headers and libraries,
which might not be available
on your Tiger TBDs.
There are a lot of intermediate,
files that aren't
available on the Tiger DVD,
which you do need to build.
And the reason they're not
on the DVD is because they're
simply not needed at runtime,
and there's no reason to install
them on every user's system.
Some examples of this are the
kernel linker static library.
This is something that's needed
by I/O Kit in the user space,
and so it's also something
that's needed by the kernel.
It's produced by the
cctools-ofiles project,
and again,
the only way to actually get this would
be if you were to build cctools-ofiles,
pay attention to the fact
that there's a build alias,
and set the environment variable,
and you'll get this file.
But while you were building that,
you'd probably first get a warning that
there wasn't a streams.h header file,
because again,
this is a header file that's never
needed in the end user systems.
It's only needed while you're
compiling portions of Mac OS X itself.
The streams.h header file comes
from the libstreams project,
and so basically you can see how
there's a lot of dependencies
which you'll need to chase.
You'll need to get all of the headers
that are needed to build these
Darwin projects and all the libraries,
and it really boils down to
starting somewhere at the beginning,
installing a few of the headers,
installing a few of the libraries,
going to the next level.
But the Darwin build scripts take
care of a lot of this for you,
which is another good reason to
use the Darwin build scripts.
So, Darwin Build.
Darwin Build is hosted at
darwinsource.opendarwin.org/darwinbuild.
It's a specialized tool for
building the Darwin source code.
It emulates Apple's
internal build environment,
so it sets all the environment variables,
the source root, the obj root,
the sim root, the dest root,
the deployment target, the uname release,
all of them.
And it cleanly handles private headers
and libraries by installing them into
a directory called the build root.
It'll grab all the pieces
it needs to build something,
put them in there, produce the build,
and then copy out the sim root and
the dest root into a well-known
location so you can inspect them and
then install them on your system.
The architecture of the star and
build script has three main parts.
There's the property lists,
which are a normal XMLP list format.
You can edit them using the
property list editor application.
And it contains all the
project information.
It contains the names of all the projects
in a particular release of Mac OS X.
It contains all the versions of them,
the URLs where they
can be downloaded from,
which projects, which header files,
which libraries are needed
before you can successfully
build each of these projects.
the environment variables
that need to be set,
everything.
There's the Darwin XRef tool,
which will load in this property
list and has the ability to
search it quickly to figure out
exactly what environment's needed.
And then there's the
Darwin build script itself,
which uses all the information
available from Darwin XRef to actually
carry out the action to build the
software and give you the end result.
So here's a little flow
chart of what happens.
The first step is you download
all the tools and you take
a property list for a build.
So since we're talking about Tiger here,
we'll be talking about build 8A428,
and we load that into
the Darwin XRef tool.
And I'll go over all the details in
the hands-on portion of the talk.
Once that's done,
we can use Darwin Build to
extract all the information and
actually issue the commands.
What happens at this point is
the sources are copied from the
source root into the build root.
So in our example,
we were building the talk sources.
It'll grab those sources,
copy them into the build root,
along with any other intermediate
files that may be needed to build.
And all the temporary build
results will go into the obj root.
Once that's done,
it's going to produce all of the
symboled versions in the symroot and
the final versions in the dustroot.
And when the build is over with,
both the dustroot and the symroot will
be copied out to a well-known location
where they're ready for you to use.
So let's move to the
hands-on portion of the talk.
And that's going to be the demo.
So hopefully you've had
a chance to download the
sample code from the website.
If not,
it should still be useful to follow
along as I type the commands.
I'm not sure what the tar archive
was named when you downloaded it.
In this example,
I have WWDC508 sample code.
Maybe it's the same name, maybe it's not.
And what we're gonna do is
change into the temp directory.
It really doesn't matter
where you extract this.
If you wanna use the temp directory,
you can follow along exactly
with the commands I'll be typing,
but anywhere will work.
And what I'm going to do is
extract using the tar command.
And it's going to extract a lot of files.
I'm going to clear the screen
here and change into that
WWDC 508 sample code directory.
Now when I list the directory,
this is the overall organization
of the Darwin build scripts.
There's the Darwin build route,
which is where all the
building actually takes place.
And what happens is a mini copy of
Mac OS X gets put into the build route,
including the GCC compiler,
the lib system library,
any of the other tools that are needed.
And that's where all of
those intermediate libraries
and headers are put.
So when you're using Darwin build,
you don't have to worry about it
polluting your system with header files
that wouldn't ordinarily be there.
Everything it downloads and installs
will go into the build route directory.
So it's really sandboxed
away from your system.
It's not going to mess it up.
The logs directory contains a
log of each build that you do.
So all the output from the make
file and all of the environment
variables that were set,
everything is logged and put in
a log file in this directory.
The sources directory is where
all of the sources are cached.
So whenever you build a project,
it'll go download the sources from
Open Darwin or from Apple's site,
and it'll store them in this directory.
If you want to make a
modification to the sources,
you can change into here.
You can start editing the source files,
and that's what will be
used when you do a build.
The bin directory contains the
actual scripts that will be running,
including the Darwin build
script and the Darwin XRef tool.
The headers directory contains the
finished product of the header files
of each project that you build.
The roots directory contains the
finished product that's the dest
root of each product that you build.
Symbols directory will contain
the symboled output of each
project that you build.
That's what you can do the line
by line debugging with in GDB.
And the plists directory contains
the property lists of each
project that we're building.
So, the first step is to load in
some of our property lists
using the Darwin XRef tool.
And we can use this,
or we can do this by using
the load index command.
And inside the plists directory,
there's an 8A428 plist,
and that describes all of the open
source projects that are in Tiger.
[Transcript missing]
I think I had already used
this demo machine before,
so.
I'll skip ahead a step.
Usually when doing a
lot of Darwin building,
you're actually gonna need
to be doing this as root.
The reason for that is most projects,
when they're being built,
will change the ownerships and
groups of the files in the destroot.
And on Unix, as you know,
the only way that you can change a
file to a user other than yourself
is if you are the super user.
So usually fairly early on,
you will need to use sudo to
give yourself root access,
and that needs to be done before
you use the Darwin build script.
I'm gonna set my prompt back down
so it doesn't get in the way.
Okay, so revisiting the command
that we just attempted,
we'll use the Darwin XRef
tool to load the index,
and the index we're
loading is the 8a428 plist.
Oh, it's missing an S.
Okay, finally success.
So we can see there are 377 projects
that are open source in Tiger.
All of them were loaded into our index.
There's another feature that
the Darwin XRef tool has,
and that is to query the
files that are in there.
So for build 8A428,
if we're interested in knowing which
version of the kernel was in that build,
we can ask for the version of XNU.
That's the project name
that produces the kernel.
You can see here that it was XNU-792.
That's what's in Tiger.
So this is a good tool that
you can use interactively to
figure out which projects belong
to which release of Mac OS X.
Another function is the ability to
look up which files are produced
by each of these projects.
And we can load the
database from a text file.
So we'll use the load files command,
and that's also stored
in the plist directories.
There's a...
Files-8a428 Text File.
And what it's doing here is
it's actually loading in all
the contents of the text file,
and that has project names and
all the files that they produce.
And when it's done with that,
we can actually do
lookups and we can ask,
you know,
here's a file that's on the disk.
Which source project did it come from?
So if we use the Darwin XRef tool,
You can say find file,
and in this example,
since we're going to be adding
Bonjour support to talk,
we're probably interested
which project talk comes from.
So we can see here that there's talk,
it was found several
places on build 8a428,
but the one we're interested
in is user bin talk,
and that comes from the network
commands dash 245 project.
Since internet connectivity may or may
not be working for some of you here,
I've gone ahead and included
these sources already with
the sample code download.
But if you didn't have the
network commands 245 sources,
DarwinBuild is actually
smart enough to go out to the
network and find them for you.
So if we change into
the sources directory,
you can see here that we do
indeed have network commands 245.
We can go ahead and
extract these sources.
And all of the Darwin sources have a tar
archive containing a top level directory
and only one top level directory.
And that directory has the
same name as the tar archive,
just without the .targz suffix.
So network commands-245.tar.gz
will produce network commands-245.
And that's the full sources of
this Network Commands project,
which as you can see,
has a lot of other things in
addition to the talk utility.
We can go ahead and
inspect this diff file.
The diff is a standard patch file,
which I've included,
and this is what will actually add in
the Bonjour support to network commands.
So you can see here,
I've actually gone through and
disabled a lot of these other
commands from being built in the
interest of keeping this demo short.
And what we've added in are,
A few things like a new browse.c file.
This is what contains the Bunger
browsing for the talk command.
We can see it actually
adds in a few new flags,
like yes,
we are using the DNS service discovery,
which is the technical term for Bonjour.
And scrolling down,
there's a lot of Bonjour-specific
code that's being added in to
the network commands project.
So to apply this patch to
our network command sources,
we can use the patch command.
And based on the style of the patch,
we're going to use patch level zero
and pipe in the network commands diff.
And that'll actually go through
and change all of those source
files in the network commands
project to do all the modifications.
You can see here,
it actually patched a lot of
files and created some new ones,
including the new browse.c
file for the talk command.
Another part of our, another part of our,
our, our, our, our,
Demo will be adding in a PAM plugin.
PAM is the Plugable
Authentication Modules interface.
And what this is going
to do is it's actually,
every time you log in,
it'll register with
Bonjour that you are logged in.
And that's the heart of the demo is talk.
We'll be able to browse
all of those registrations,
see who's logged in on your machine,
and you'll be able to pick and
choose the logins from a list.
So if we change back to
the directory we were in,
and again,
this is that top level directory that has
the general organization of DarwinBuild.
There's one more thing we
need to do for this demo.
It's only done for the
sake of expediency here,
and that is we'll load in a
WWDC property list that has some
special values for this demo,
just so you don't have
to go out to the network,
and you can build these
projects a little bit quicker.
So basically this is a
copy of that 8a428p list,
the Tiger property list,
but it has a few changes.
So, what we can do now is we can
actually go ahead and build
the network commands project.
And we can do this using
the Darwin build tool.
And Darwin build takes a build argument,
So if you're gonna be
building for say 8A428,
or in this case, we're gonna be building
for the WWDC build,
which is just a little
hack for efficiency,
you can specify it here.
If you want Darwin build to
download all of those intermediate
libraries and header files for you,
you can give it the chroot option,
and that tells it to do everything
entirely within the build root and
make that a self-contained environment.
And then all you need to do
is give it the name of the
project that you want to build.
In this case, network commands.
What it's doing now is it's actually
copying things from the build root
and the various sources directory,
I'm sorry, from the various sources
directories into the build root.
- And once it's done that,
it goes through and it actually
did a whole build right
there of the talk command,
and you can see these are all the
files that were produced by the build.
Everything scrolled by rather fast,
but it keeps a log for us
in that logs directory.
So let me list the logs directory.
So inside the logs directory,
there's a subdirectory for
each different project name.
You can see here you have network
commands dash 245 dot log tilde one,
and network commands dash
245 dot log tilde two.
What the number after the tilde
means is the attempt of each build,
and that'll just be incremented
by one with each attempt.
So every time you task it to
build network commands 245,
it's going to add one to that number.
And this basically lets you
compare the log from the last
build to the current build,
see what might have changed,
see if you fixed the bug
that you were hoping to fix.
The reason why there's a tilde one in
there is that was already there when
the sample code was provided to you,
and the build that we did
just now produced tilde two.
So if we actually look at
the contents of that file...
Then we can see what happened
when we asked for the
network commands to be built.
You can see here a little header that
kind of describes what's going on.
So it's building network commands 245,
attempt number two on the current date.
has a list of some important information,
including which version of
the compiler tools is used.
So inside our build route,
it knows that we need to use GCC 3.3,
and it set it up appropriately.
It also indicates which version
of ccTools was used that
contains the GNU assembler.
It'll go on and list out all of the
environment variables that were set.
You can see that the
environment variables,
which appear to be in alphabetical order,
contain things like
Full path for the dest root,
a full path for the object root,
the right deployment target,
and all the other variables
which I had talked about earlier.
After setting up the environment,
it'll actually issue the command to make.
You can see the right way to do
this would be to say make install,
and then take a lot of those
same environment variables and
actually pass them as arguments.
Some of the make files will
use the environment variables,
some of the make files actually
expect it to be arguments,
so to be safe, it's best to do both.
To both set the environment
variable and pass it as an
argument to the make command.
And this is where the actual
build log takes place.
All of the following commands
are things that were output
after the make had started.
So,
now we can look in the roots directory.
And in the roots directory,
we also have a,
- This is the sub directory,
that's network commands.
And you can see that there's a network
commands dash 245 dot root tilde two.
And that is the finished product of what
was built at the same time we captured
that log that we were just looking at.
And inside here,
there's the user directory.
Change this to a find command.
We can actually list everything
that's in that directory.
And you can see there's user bin talk.
There's our PAM module,
which we'll be installing to
register our logins with Funger.
And then there's a man
page for each of them.
In order to give you an example
of how you can use this open
source for line-by-line debugging,
what I'm going to do now
is do a build for the
- So, we're going to do build
wwdc in the chroot,
and we're going to be building ncurses.
This is going to copy files
in to the build route and
start building end curses.
End curses will actually
take a little while to build,
so I'm going to cancel out of this
and use the pre-built version that
was supplied in the sample code.
If you want, you can let this finish,
or you can just cancel it
at the same time and we can
use the pre-built version.
So I'm canceling it.
So assuming that build succeeded,
it would put the finished
product into roots.
There's end curses.
anchors 15.root tilde one
is the finished product.
But in this case,
we want to use the symboled versions,
right?
We want to actually do some
line-by-line debugging using GDB.
Now,
one of the things that Apple sets up when
it builds all of its Mac OS X sources
is to set the source cache directory,
and that's where all these sources go.
So what we'll do is
we'll make a SIM link,
and we're gonna link into our build root,
So we have temp, WWDC, underbar 508,
underbar sample code.
That was that sample code
directory that we extracted.
In the build route,
there is a source cache directory.
And we're gonna make a link at
the root level source cache.
So when we're done, we'll see that.
Source cache points to the
one that's in our build root.
What we can do at this
point is actually use GDB.
And if we look in the symbols directory,
there's a network commands subdirectory,
as you might expect.
There's a network commands
dash 245 dot sim tilde two,
or if you haven't built it,
you can do tilde one,
which was the pre-installed version.
And then there's the talk command.
That's a fully symboled
version of talk right here.
So we've started talk in GDB.
There's an environment variable which
you can use that overrides the default
search path for libraries on the system.
And what we can do is we can
point the library path to the
symboled version of end curses.
So if we set our environment,
[Transcript missing]
We can actually set that to
temp-wwc-508-sample-code:
symbols-wwc-508-sample-code:
Ncurses 15.SIM.TILDA1
Sorry, there's a top level directory
that has just the directory name.
So, ncursors/ncursors-15.sim-1.
And then in this directory,
if we were to have
browsed around beforehand,
you would see that there's a lib
directory followed by another
lib directory followed by,
or actually we don't need to
specify the library itself,
we just need to give it the path.
So it'll find the
NCRISIS library in here.
Now we can set a breakpoint at main,
which will be the main function of talk,
and you can see that's in talk.c.
And we can also set a
breakpoint at init screen,
which is the initialized function
for the endcurses library,
which does all the screen
drawing in the terminal.
Now I can run and we'll
do the --list argument.
So what we're gonna say is we wanna list
out all of the Bonjour registrations
that are available to talk with.
You can see here we've stopped
at line one of the main program,
or of the main function
in the talk program.
We can use next to step line by line.
When we continue,
we should break at the init screen
function inside the ncursors library.
And sure enough,
we have a break at init screen,
although I don't see the source there.
I might have given you
the wrong directory here.
- Can you put out a GDB for a second?
Uh-huh.
So we had a mistake in our path.
Okay, so starting from the top quickly,
if you're still on GDB,
we'll catch up with you there.
So we're gonna do a GDB of symbols,
network commands, networkcommands.sim,
tilde two,
[Transcript missing]
To the same thing we did before,
what we were missing
was this directory here,
the /user.
And when we set that environment,
now we should be able to set
a breakpoint at main and set
a breakpoint at init screen.
We can run again with
the --list argument.
We have our breakpoint at main,
and if we continue,
We have our breakpoint out in its screen.
So this is actually source code
that's in that NCurses library,
which is the library that's used by Talk.
It's a standard system library,
so you can use this approach when
you're debugging your own applications.
And you can see that we can actually
step inside the dynamic library.
We can do line-by-line debugging in here.
We can print the values of the variables.
So this is actually pretty useful stuff.
Now that we've demoed the debugging,
let's see the whole thing in action
and see how we can actually install
this modified version of Talk onto our
Mac OS X system and see what it does.
So, like I was saying earlier,
it's really important to make backups.
So we're gonna be copying the
userbin talk utility out of the
dest root and into the base system.
Before we do that,
we want to set a copy aside so we
can restore from it once we're done.
So let's copy userbin-talk
to userbin-talk.original.
Now we can copy from our roots directory,
which has the finished
product of network commands,
Network commands -245.root tilde
two is our finished product.
And user bin talk can be copied
into the real user bin talk.
We also have our PAM module,
which we want to install.
There wasn't anything there originally,
so there's no backup copy to make.
We're just installing something new.
And that is stored in user share.
No, it's not user share.
These are lib, pam, pammdnsregister.so,
So we're gonna copy that into
the real user libpam directory.
Now, there's two configuration
files that we'll need to edit
in order to activate this.
Kevin Van Vechten
One is the /etc/pam.d
directory login file.
So this is the list of all
the PAM modules that should be
activated when you do a login.
And we're gonna copy that
aside so we have a backup copy.
We're gonna copy that to login.original.
And then we're going to edit it.
Actually, we can use VI to edit it.
You can open a new line
by typing lowercase o.
This is going to be a session plugin.
It's just optional.
It's not required for
logging in successfully.
And the plugin is pammdnsregister.so.
You can hit the escape key
to get out of edit mode.
The colon key to do a command.
We're gonna write this file.
You can do that with write,
or some way with W exclamation.
So we've written the
file back out to disk,
and then colon Q will quit VI.
The second thing we need to do is
start the talk server on our system.
And in Tiger,
there's a new facility for doing this.
It's called LaunchD.
There's the launch control program.
We'll want to actually load
in a new daemon on the system,
which is the talk daemon.
And basically how that's done is you load
and unload property lists into LaunchD,
which will then activate
the write system service.
And that property list is
already on your system.
It's in system library.
Launch demons.
And the one we're loading is ntalk.plist.
So now we're running talk on our system,
and we also have a PAM module
which will register us with
Bonjour every time we log in.
So let's try a new login.
I just did that by creating
a new terminal window.
will make the font size big
enough for everyone to see.
There's a DNS SD command,
which if we give it the -b argument,
that means we want to
browse Bunger registrations.
We're looking for ntalk, oops.
[Transcript missing]
I'm sorry, it's an uppercase B.
And you can see here that there is
actually one registration that was
listed out on the local domain.
That's ntalk.tcp.
And the text is Apple,
that's my username right now,
at the local host, and I am in TTY,
P2 is my terminal name.
So if we go back to where
our talk command is,
if we actually run talk with --list,
there you see a list.
Here's my registration.
Hopefully if you guys are on the network,
you can see each other appearing here.
If I create more login sessions,
more people will be added to the list.
When using the arrow keys,
you can select one from the list.
We'll send a talk request to that person.
I don't know why it just quit.
Anyway,
that's basically how you would go about
using the Darwin build scripts to modify
some built-in component of Mac OS X.
Real quick, I'll go through the steps
of restoring your system.
Is the demo screen back on?
Okay,
if we simply move this /etc/pam.d/login
original file back to /etc/pam.d/login,
I'll restore your original PAM settings.
We can move userbin_talk.original
back to userbin_talk.
You can remove user lib
pam_mdnsregister.so,
and we can unload the talk launch daemon.
[Transcript missing]
and talk.plist.
And your system should be
back to its original state.
Now, I think we can move ahead to
the question and answer period.
Anyone have any questions in general
about using Apple's open source,
building projects for Darwin?
Please step up to a microphone
if you have a question.